README.md, before:

# Next page tester

[![Build status][ci-badge]][ci]
[![Test coverage report][coveralls-badge]][coveralls]
[![Npm version][npm-badge]][npm]

The missing DOM integration testing tool for [Next.js][next-github].

Given a Next.js route, this library will **render the matching page in JSDOM**, provided with the expected **props** derived from Next.js' [**routing system**][next-docs-routing] and [**data fetching methods**][next-docs-data-fetching].

```js
import { getPage } from 'next-page-tester';
import { screen, fireEvent } from '@testing-library/dom';

describe('Blog page', () => {
  it('renders blog page', async () => {
    const { render } = await getPage({
      route: '/blog/1',
    });

    render();
    expect(screen.getByText('Blog')).toBeInTheDocument();

    fireEvent.click(screen.getByText('Link'));
    await screen.findByText('Linked page');
  });
});
```

## What

The idea behind this library is to reproduce as closely as possible the way Next.js works without spinning up servers, and render the output in a local JSDOM environment.

In order to provide a valuable testing experience `next-page-tester` replicates the **rendering flow of an actual `next.js` application**:

1. **fetch data** for a given route
2. **render** the server-side rendered result to JSDOM as plain html (including `head` element)
3. **mount/hydrate** the client application to the previously rendered html

The mounted application is **interactive** and can be tested with any DOM testing library (like [`@testing-library/dom`](https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/intro)).

`next-page-tester` will take care of:

- loading and execute modules in the **expected browser or server environments**
- **resolving** provided **routes** into matching page component
- calling **Next.js data fetching methods** (`getServerSideProps`, `getInitialProps` or `getStaticProps`) if the case
- wrapping page with custom `_app` and `_document` components
- emulating **client side navigation** via `Link`, `router.push`, `router.replace`
- handling pages' `redirect` returns
- supporting `next/router`, `next/head`, `next/link`

## API

### getPage

`getPage` accepts an [option object](#options) and returns 4 values:

```js
import { getPage } from 'next-page-tester';
const { render, serverRender, html, page } = await getPage({ options });
```

### render()

Type: `() => { nextRoot: HTMLElement<NextRoot> }`<br/>
Returns: `#__next` root element element.

Unless you have an advanced use-case, you should mostly use this method. Under the hood it calls `serverRender()` and then mounts/hydrates the React application into JSDOM `#__next` root element. This is what users would get/see when they visit a page.

### serverRender()

Type: `() => { nextRoot: HTMLElement<NextRoot> }`<br/>
Returns: `#__next` root element element.

Inject the output of server side rendering into the DOM and doesn't mount React. Use it to test how Next.js renders in the following scenarios:

- before Reacts mounts
- when JS is disabled
- SEO tests

### serverRenderToString()

Type: `() => { html: string }`

`html` is the HTML string representing output of server side rendering.

### page

Type: `React.ReactElement<AppElement>`

React element of the application.

## Options

| Property                       | Description                                                   | type               | Default         |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | --------------- |
| **route** (mandatory)          | Next route (must start with `/`)                              | `string`           | -               |
| **req**                        | Enhance default mocked [request object][req-docs]             | `req => req`       | -               |
| **res**                        | Enhance default mocked [response object][res-docs]            | `res => res`       | -               |
| **router**                     | Enhance default mocked [Next router object][next-docs-router] | `router => router` | -               |
| **useApp**                     | Render [custom App component][next-docs-custom-app]           | `boolean`          | `true`          |
| **useDocument** (experimental) | Render [Document component][next-docs-custom-document]        | `boolean`          | `false`         |
| **nextRoot**                   | Absolute path to Next.js root folder                          | `string`           | _auto detected_ |

## Set up your test environment

Since Next.js is not designed to run in a JSDOM environment we need to **setup the default JSDOM** to allow a smoother testing experience:

- Provide a `window.scrollTo` mock
- Provide a `IntersectionObserver` mock
- Cleanup DOM after each test

Run [`initTestHelpers`](/src/testHelpers.ts) in your global tests setup (in case of Jest It is `setupFilesAfterEnv` file):

```js
import { initTestHelpers } from 'next-page-tester';
initTestHelpers();
```

### Optional: patch Jest

Until **Jest v27** is published, you might need to patch `jest` in order to load modules with [proper server/client environments](#73). _Don't do this until you actually encounter issues_.

1. Install [`patch-package`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/patch-package) and follow its setup instructions
2. Manually update `node_modules/jest-runtime/build/index.js` file and replicate [this commit](https://github.com/facebook/jest/commit/e5a84d92fc906a5bb140f9753b644319cea095da#diff-c0d5b59e96fdc7ffc98405e8afb46d525505bc7b1c24916b5c8482de5a186c00)
3. Run `npx patch-package jest-runtime` or `yarn patch-package jest-runtime`

## Examples

Under [examples folder][examples-folder] we're documenting the testing cases which `next-page-tester` enables.

## Notes

- Data fetching methods' context `req` and `res` objects are mocked with [node-mocks-http][node-mocks-http]
- Next page tester can be used with any testing framework/library (it's not tied to Jest or Testing library)
- It might be necessary to install `@types/react-dom` and `@types/webpack` when using Typescript in `strict` mode due to [this bug][next-gh-strict-bug]

### Experimental `useDocument` option

`useDocument` option is partially implemented and might be unstable.

### Next.js versions support

`next-page-tester` focuses on supporting only the last major version of Next.js:

| next-page-tester | next.js |
| ---------------- | ------- |
| v0.1.0 - v0.7.0  | v9.X.X  |
| v0.8.0 +         | v10.X.X |

## FAQ

### How do I make cookies available in Next.js data fetching methods?

You can set cookies by appending them to `document.cookie` before calling `getPage`. `next-page-tester` will propagate cookies to `ctx.req.headers.cookie` so they will be available to data fetching methods. This also applies to subsequent fetching methods calls triggered by client side navigation.

```ts
test('authenticated page', async () => {
  document.cookie = 'SessionId=super=secret';
  document.cookie = 'SomeOtherCookie=SomeOtherValue';

  const { render } = await getPage({
    route: '/authenticated',
  });
  render();
});
```

Note: `document.cookie` does not get cleaned up automatically. You'll have to clear it manually after each test to keep everything in isolation.

### Error: Not implemented: window.scrollTo

Next.js `Link` component invokes `window.scrollTo` on click which is not implemented in JSDOM environment. In order to fix the error you should [set up your test environment](#set-up-your-test-environment) or provide [your own `window.scrollTo` mock](https://qiita.com/akameco/items/0edfdae02507204b24c8).

## Todo's

- Consider reusing Next.js code parts (not only types)
- Consider supporting Next.js `trailingSlash` option

## Contributors ✨

Thanks goes to these wonderful people ([emoji key](https://allcontributors.org/docs/en/emoji-key)):

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><a href="http://www.andreacarraro.it"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/4573549?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Andrea Carraro</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=toomuchdesign" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="#infra-toomuchdesign" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=toomuchdesign" title="Tests">⚠️</a> <a href="#maintenance-toomuchdesign" title="Maintenance">🚧</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://www.matej.snuderl.si/"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/8524109?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Matej Šnuderl</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="#infra-Meemaw" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Tests">⚠️</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/pulls?q=is%3Apr+reviewed-by%3AMeemaw" title="Reviewed Pull Requests">👀</a> <a href="#ideas-Meemaw" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Documentation">📖</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://jason-williams.co.uk"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/936006?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Jason Williams</b></sub></a><br /><a href="#ideas-jasonwilliams" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<!-- markdownlint-enable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:END -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:START -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:END -->

This project follows the [all-contributors](https://github.com/all-contributors/all-contributors) specification. Contributions of any kind welcome!

[ci]: https://travis-ci.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester
[ci-badge]: https://travis-ci.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester.svg?branch=master
[npm]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/next-page-tester
[npm-badge]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/next-page-tester.svg
[coveralls-badge]: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/badge.svg?branch=master
[coveralls]: https://coveralls.io/github/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester?branch=master
[next-github]: https://nextjs.org/
[req-docs]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_clientrequest
[res-docs]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse
[node-mocks-http]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-mocks-http
[next-docs-routing]: https://nextjs.org/docs/routing/introduction
[next-docs-data-fetching]: https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/data-fetching
[next-docs-router]: https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/next/router
[next-docs-custom-app]: https://nextjs.org/docs/advanced-features/custom-app
[next-docs-custom-document]: https://nextjs.org/docs/advanced-features/custom-document
[next-gh-strict-bug]: https://github.com/vercel/next.js/issues/16219
[error-log-mock]: src/__tests__/use-document/use-document.test.tsx#L8
[examples-folder]: examples

Commit message:

Add notice about side effects

README.md, after:

# Next page tester

[![Build status][ci-badge]][ci]
[![Test coverage report][coveralls-badge]][coveralls]
[![Npm version][npm-badge]][npm]

The missing DOM integration testing tool for [Next.js][next-github].

Given a Next.js route, this library will **render the matching page in JSDOM**, provided with the expected **props** derived from Next.js' [**routing system**][next-docs-routing] and [**data fetching methods**][next-docs-data-fetching].

```js
import { getPage } from 'next-page-tester';
import { screen, fireEvent } from '@testing-library/dom';

describe('Blog page', () => {
  it('renders blog page', async () => {
    const { render } = await getPage({
      route: '/blog/1',
    });

    render();
    expect(screen.getByText('Blog')).toBeInTheDocument();

    fireEvent.click(screen.getByText('Link'));
    await screen.findByText('Linked page');
  });
});
```

## What

The idea behind this library is to reproduce as closely as possible the way Next.js works without spinning up servers, and render the output in a local JSDOM environment.

In order to provide a valuable testing experience `next-page-tester` replicates the **rendering flow of an actual `next.js` application**:

1. **fetch data** for a given route
2. **render** the server-side rendered result to JSDOM as plain html (including `head` element)
3. **mount/hydrate** the client application to the previously rendered html

The mounted application is **interactive** and can be tested with any DOM testing library (like [`@testing-library/dom`](https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/intro)).

`next-page-tester` will take care of:

- loading and execute modules in the **expected browser or server environments**
- **resolving** provided **routes** into matching page component
- calling **Next.js data fetching methods** (`getServerSideProps`, `getInitialProps` or `getStaticProps`) if the case
- wrapping page with custom `_app` and `_document` components
- emulating **client side navigation** via `Link`, `router.push`, `router.replace`
- handling pages' `redirect` returns
- supporting `next/router`, `next/head`, `next/link`

## API

### getPage

`getPage` accepts an [option object](#options) and returns 4 values:

```js
import { getPage } from 'next-page-tester';
const { render, serverRender, html, page } = await getPage({ options });
```

### render()

Type: `() => { nextRoot: HTMLElement<NextRoot> }`<br/>
Returns: `#__next` root element element.

Unless you have an advanced use-case, you should mostly use this method. Under the hood it calls `serverRender()` and then mounts/hydrates the React application into JSDOM `#__next` root element. This is what users would get/see when they visit a page.

### serverRender()

Type: `() => { nextRoot: HTMLElement<NextRoot> }`<br/>
Returns: `#__next` root element element.

Inject the output of server side rendering into the DOM but doesn't mount React. Use it to test how Next.js renders in the following scenarios:

- before Reacts mounts
- when JS is disabled
- SEO tests

### serverRenderToString()

Type: `() => { html: string }`

Render the output of server side rendering as HTML string. This is a pure method without side-effects.

### page

Type: `React.ReactElement<AppElement>`

React element of the application.

## Options

| Property                       | Description                                                   | type               | Default         |
| ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | --------------- |
| **route** (mandatory)          | Next route (must start with `/`)                              | `string`           | -               |
| **req**                        | Enhance default mocked [request object][req-docs]             | `req => req`       | -               |
| **res**                        | Enhance default mocked [response object][res-docs]            | `res => res`       | -               |
| **router**                     | Enhance default mocked [Next router object][next-docs-router] | `router => router` | -               |
| **useApp**                     | Render [custom App component][next-docs-custom-app]           | `boolean`          | `true`          |
| **useDocument** (experimental) | Render [Document component][next-docs-custom-document]        | `boolean`          | `false`         |
| **nextRoot**                   | Absolute path to Next.js root folder                          | `string`           | _auto detected_ |

## Set up your test environment

Since Next.js is not designed to run in a JSDOM environment we need to **setup the default JSDOM** to allow a smoother testing experience:

- Provide a `window.scrollTo` mock
- Provide a `IntersectionObserver` mock
- Cleanup DOM after each test

Run [`initTestHelpers`](/src/testHelpers.ts) in your global tests setup (in case of Jest It is `setupFilesAfterEnv` file):

```js
import { initTestHelpers } from 'next-page-tester';
initTestHelpers();
```

### Optional: patch Jest

Until **Jest v27** is published, you might need to patch `jest` in order to load modules with [proper server/client environments](#73). _Don't do this until you actually encounter issues_.

1. Install [`patch-package`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/patch-package) and follow its setup instructions
2. Manually update `node_modules/jest-runtime/build/index.js` file and replicate [this commit](https://github.com/facebook/jest/commit/e5a84d92fc906a5bb140f9753b644319cea095da#diff-c0d5b59e96fdc7ffc98405e8afb46d525505bc7b1c24916b5c8482de5a186c00)
3. Run `npx patch-package jest-runtime` or `yarn patch-package jest-runtime`

## Examples

Under [examples folder][examples-folder] we're documenting the testing cases which `next-page-tester` enables.

## Notes

- Data fetching methods' context `req` and `res` objects are mocked with [node-mocks-http][node-mocks-http]
- Next page tester can be used with any testing framework/library (it's not tied to Jest or Testing library)
- It might be necessary to install `@types/react-dom` and `@types/webpack` when using Typescript in `strict` mode due to [this bug][next-gh-strict-bug]

### Experimental `useDocument` option

`useDocument` option is partially implemented and might be unstable.

### Next.js versions support

`next-page-tester` focuses on supporting only the last major version of Next.js:

| next-page-tester | next.js |
| ---------------- | ------- |
| v0.1.0 - v0.7.0  | v9.X.X  |
| v0.8.0 +         | v10.X.X |

## FAQ

### How do I make cookies available in Next.js data fetching methods?

You can set cookies by appending them to `document.cookie` before calling `getPage`. `next-page-tester` will propagate cookies to `ctx.req.headers.cookie` so they will be available to data fetching methods. This also applies to subsequent fetching methods calls triggered by client side navigation.

```ts
test('authenticated page', async () => {
  document.cookie = 'SessionId=super=secret';
  document.cookie = 'SomeOtherCookie=SomeOtherValue';

  const { render } = await getPage({
    route: '/authenticated',
  });
  render();
});
```

Note: `document.cookie` does not get cleaned up automatically. You'll have to clear it manually after each test to keep everything in isolation.

### Error: Not implemented: window.scrollTo

Next.js `Link` component invokes `window.scrollTo` on click which is not implemented in JSDOM environment. In order to fix the error you should [set up your test environment](#set-up-your-test-environment) or provide [your own `window.scrollTo` mock](https://qiita.com/akameco/items/0edfdae02507204b24c8).

## Todo's

- Consider reusing Next.js code parts (not only types)
- Consider supporting Next.js `trailingSlash` option

## Contributors ✨

Thanks goes to these wonderful people ([emoji key](https://allcontributors.org/docs/en/emoji-key)):

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><a href="http://www.andreacarraro.it"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/4573549?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Andrea Carraro</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=toomuchdesign" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="#infra-toomuchdesign" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=toomuchdesign" title="Tests">⚠️</a> <a href="#maintenance-toomuchdesign" title="Maintenance">🚧</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://www.matej.snuderl.si/"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/8524109?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Matej Šnuderl</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="#infra-Meemaw" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Tests">⚠️</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/pulls?q=is%3Apr+reviewed-by%3AMeemaw" title="Reviewed Pull Requests">👀</a> <a href="#ideas-Meemaw" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a> <a href="https://github.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/commits?author=Meemaw" title="Documentation">📖</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://jason-williams.co.uk"><img src="https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/936006?v=4" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Jason Williams</b></sub></a><br /><a href="#ideas-jasonwilliams" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<!-- markdownlint-enable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:END -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:START -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:END -->

This project follows the [all-contributors](https://github.com/all-contributors/all-contributors) specification. Contributions of any kind welcome!

[ci]: https://travis-ci.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester
[ci-badge]: https://travis-ci.com/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester.svg?branch=master
[npm]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/next-page-tester
[npm-badge]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/next-page-tester.svg
[coveralls-badge]: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester/badge.svg?branch=master
[coveralls]: https://coveralls.io/github/toomuchdesign/next-page-tester?branch=master
[next-github]: https://nextjs.org/
[req-docs]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_clientrequest
[res-docs]: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_class_http_serverresponse
[node-mocks-http]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-mocks-http
[next-docs-routing]: https://nextjs.org/docs/routing/introduction
[next-docs-data-fetching]: https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/data-fetching
[next-docs-router]: https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/next/router
[next-docs-custom-app]: https://nextjs.org/docs/advanced-features/custom-app
[next-docs-custom-document]: https://nextjs.org/docs/advanced-features/custom-document
[next-gh-strict-bug]: https://github.com/vercel/next.js/issues/16219
[error-log-mock]: src/__tests__/use-document/use-document.test.tsx#L8
[examples-folder]: examples
